<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="Content-Type"/>
<link href="styles/zstylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<title>Preface</title>
</head>

<body>
	<p class="noindent top">This Stanford CS Education document tries to summarize all the basic features of the C language. The coverage is pretty quick, so it is most appropriate as review or for someone with some programming background in another language. Topics include variables, int types, floating point types, promotion, truncation, operators, control structures (if, while, for), functions, value parameters, reference parameters, structs, pointers, arrays, the pre-processor, and the standard C library functions.</p>
	<p>The most recent version is always maintained at its Stanford CS Education Library URL <a href="http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/101/">http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/101/</a>. Please send your comments to <a href="mailto:nick.parlante@cs.stanford.edu">nick.parlante@cs.stanford.edu</a>.</p>
	<p>I hope you can share and enjoy this document in the spirit of goodwill in which it is given away -- Nick Parlante, 4/2003, Stanford California.</p>

	<div class="black-box">
		<p class="noindent"><b>Stanford CS Education Library</b> This is document #101, Essential C, in the Stanford CS Education Library. This and other educational materials are available for free at <a href="http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/">http://cslibrary.stanford.edu/</a>. This article is free to be used, reproduced, excerpted, retransmitted, or sold so long as this notice is clearly reproduced at its beginning.</p>
	</div>

	<h1 class="subheading">Revision History</h1>
	<p class="noindent">11/1998 -- original major version. Based on my old C handout for CS107. Thanks to JonBecker for proofreading and Mike Cleron for the original inspiration.</p>
	<p>Revised 4/2003 with many helpful typo and other suggestions from Negar Shamma and
A. P. Garcia</p>

</body>
</html>
